---
id: 1749048636-rkhs
aliases:
  - rkhs
tags: []
bibFile: assets/bibliography.json
categories:
  - rkhs
date: "2025-06-04"
params:
  math: true
title: Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces
---

Based on [this page](https://mbernste.github.io/posts/rkhs/).

## Kernel 

Roughly speaking, a kernel does only two things:

1. Projecting the objects into some vector space (possibly infinite dimensional);

2. Performing an inner product on those vectors.

Mathematically speaking, let $\mathcal{X}$ be a set of objects—it might be a scalar, a vector, a function, etc. A kernel $K$ is a **function**: $K: \mathcal{X} \times \mathcal{X} \mapsto \mathbb{R}$ such that, for all $x_{1}, x_{2} \in \mathcal{X}$, $K(x_{1}, x_{2}) = \langle \phi(x_{1}), \phi(x_{2}) \rangle$.

Here, the function $\phi: \mathcal{X} \mapsto \mathcal{Y}$ projects the object $x$ into some vector space $\mathcal{Y}$.

The implicit calculation of $K$ is refer to as the **kernel trick**.


## RKHS 

A reproducing kernel Hilbert space is some kind of {{< backlink "1749050887-hilbert-space" "Hilbert spaces" >}}. Elements of a RKHS are functions.

A RKHS is a Hilbert space of functions with a particular property: all {{< backlink "1749053168-evaluation-functional" "evaluation functionals" >}} are continuous. 

{{< admonition type="tip" title="Definition" >}}
A Hilbert space $(\mathcal{H}, \mathcal{F}, \langle \cdot, \cdot \rangle)$ is a reproducing kernel Hilbert space if, given any $x \in \mathcal{X}$, the evaluation functional for $x$, $\delta_x(f) \coloneqq f(x)$ is continuous, where $f \in \mathcal{H}$.
{{< /admonition >}}

Ok, so far, we have three different sets: $\mathcal{H}$, a set of functions, $\mathcal{X}$, a set of objects and $\mathbb{R}$, a set of scalars. We can define mappings between these different sets!

1. Each function $f \in \mathcal{H}$ defines a *unique* mapping between $\mathcal{X}$ and $\mathbb{R}$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
 f: \mathcal{X} & \to \mathbb{R} \\\\\\
  x & \mapsto c.
\end{aligned}
$$

2. Each object $x \in \mathcal{X}$ defines a mapping between $\mathcal{H}$ and $\mathbb{R}$ thanks to the evaluation functionals:

$$\begin{aligned}
  \delta_x: \mathcal{H} & \to \mathbb{R} \\\\\\
            f & \mapsto c.
\end{aligned}
$$

There is one property that differentiates RKHS from an arbitrary Hilbert space: for each object $x \in \mathcal{X}$, the evaluation functional $\delta_x$ is continuous. 

To understand this property, we can view the set $\mathcal{H}$ as some *dense* space in some infinite-dimensional function space. It is possible to approximate any function in $\mathcal{H}$ arbitrarily well. For some fixed $x \in \mathcal{X}$, their exists a *smooth* surface where lies $\delta_x$—here, "smooth" emphasizes the continuity of the evaluation functional. Thus, two functions that are close to each other in $\mathcal{H}$ will be mapped to two similar values by $\delta_x$. 

From the definition, we have another property of RKHS. If we have a sequence of functions $f_{1}, f_{2}, \dots$ in $\mathcal{H}$ that converge to a function $f$ in $\mathcal{H}$, then these functions converge *pointwise* to $f$. It can be written mathematically as

$$\lim_{n \to \infty} \left\\| f_n - f \right\\|_{\mathcal{H}} = 0 \Rightarrow \forall x \in \mathcal{X}, \lim\_{n \to \infty} \left| f_n(x) - f(x) \right| = 0.$$

Because the evaluation functional is continuous, the sequence of functions not only converge to a function $f \in \mathcal{H}$, but also converge *point-by-point* to $f$ for all $x \in \mathcal{X}$.

## Reproducing kernel

The idea of a reproducing kernel is that we can "reproduce" any evaluation functional using the inner products in the Hilbert space. Mathematically, for any given object $x \in \mathcal{X}$, there exists some function $k_x \in \mathcal{H}$ where 

$$\delta_x(f) = f(x) = \langle f, k_x \rangle.$$

The Riesz representation theorem states that the function $k_x$ is unique **for a given $x \in \mathcal{X}$**. If we choose another object $y \in \mathcal{X}$, then, there exists a different function $k_y$ that we can use to reproduce $\delta_y$. Because $k_x$ is an element of $\mathcal{H}$, we have that $\delta_y(k_x) = \langle k_x, k_y \rangle$.

From that, we can construct a function $K$—the kernel—that operates on pairs of elements $x, y \in \mathcal{X}$:

$$K(x, y) \coloneqq \delta_y(k_x) = \langle k_x, k_y \rangle.$$

To make things clear, we can define a function $\phi: \mathcal{X} \mapsto \mathcal{H}$ that maps elements in $\mathcal{X}$ to their corresponding element in the Hilbert space $\mathcal{H}$ that reproduces its corresponding evaluation functional. That is,

$$\phi(x) \coloneqq k_x, \quad\text{where}\quad \forall f \in \mathcal{H},~ \delta_x(f) = \langle f, k_x \rangle,$$
and thus,
$$K(x, y) = \left\langle \phi(x), \phi(y) \right\rangle.$$

The function $\phi$ is called the **feature map** that maps the objects in $\mathcal{X}$ to a new "feature representation" in the RKHS.


## The kernel trick

Here, we are interested to find an appropriate function $\phi$ that maps each $x \in \mathcal{X}$ to its $k_x$ in $\mathcal{H}$ that satisfies the reproducing property for $\delta_x$. It turns out we don't need to derive this function explicitly! 

Actually, if we find a function $K: \mathcal{X} \times \mathcal{X} \to \mathbb{R}$ that is **positive-definite**, then this function will automatically be a kernel function for some unique RKHS. Stated differently, we don't need to define the RKHS itself, but simply find a kernel function $K$ that is **positive-definite**—this is the Moore-Aronszajn theorem.

{{< admonition type="danger" title="Moore-Aronszajn theorem" >}}
Let $K: \mathcal{X} \times \mathcal{X} \to \mathbb{R}$ be a symmetric, positive-definite function. Then, there exists a **unique** RKHS of functions on $\mathcal{X}$ for which the function $K$ is the reproducing kernel.
{{< /admonition >}}

One consequence of the Moore-Aronszajn theorem is that we don't really care about the mapping $\phi$, it happens explicitly.

{{< admonition type="tip" title="Definition" >}}
A multivariate function is symmetric it its value is the same no matter the ordering of the arguments.
{{< /admonition >}}

{{< admonition type="tip" title="Definition" >}}
A bivariate function, $K: \mathcal{X} \times \mathcal{X} \to \mathbb{R}$ is positive-definite if $\forall n \in \mathbb{N}$, $\forall x_{1}, \dots, x_{n} \in \mathcal{X}$, $\forall c_{1}, \dots, c_{n} \in \mathbb{R}$, it holds that
$$\sum_{i = 1}^{n} \sum_{j = 1}^{n} c_{i}c_{j}K(x_{i}, x_{j}) \geq 0.$$
{{< /admonition >}}

We can show that: $K(x, y) = \left\langle K(x, \cdot), K(y, \cdot) \right\rangle$. So, the function $\phi(x)$ is simply $K(x, \cdot)$. 

